both in our personal lives and in our
political lives
both individually and when you scale it
up
and speak on the level of the community
the neighborhood the city the nation
we make decisions in the shadow
of a million options we never
truly gave consideration to because
we presumed them to be impossible
the distinction between the possible and
the impossible
is thus of paramount political
and emotional significance in our lives
what most people never learn to do is to
think through in a systematic way
a series of comparable options and
alternatives
to move past the simplistic notion of
impossibility
in their heads to instead have a nuanced
sense
of the advantages and disadvantages of
each possibility
now when you look at a towering
tyrannical over-the-top figure like elon
musk
you were talking about possibility and
impossibility in a very crude sense
but nevertheless we all have something
to learn and starting to reflect on
again even in our own lives personally
in moving past a simple sense of
this is impossible now to have
one spaceship move back and forth
between the earth and mars
hundreds of times or one thousand times
and to carry a small number of people
between earth and mars
on each trip would have a cost
in the trillions of dollars the numbers
being dealt with
are almost impossible to imagine
almost impossible to imagine that
doesn't mean it's impossible
to do that's not what elon musk is
promising
what elon musk is promising is that he
will build 1
000 ships that will make the trip
simultaneously in an armada
so the number of trillions of dollars is
here
increased by more than a thousand-fold
the costs are astronomically higher now
let's just say you picture
your entire family your circle of all
your
friends and relations everyone you know
and care about in the city you're living
in
and let's just say you learned that due
to global warming your city was going to
be underwater
so you all have to move to some other
let's say you have to move to an empty
field
up in the mountains somewhere on higher
ground say okay there are two ways i can
do this
i can rent one bus and have a bus make a
trip back and forth
again and again over months
or it can have 1 000 buses we're gonna
have one thousand
we're gonna rent one thousand bucks for
something we're all gonna get loaded up
together at the same time
and move from one location another which
one is gonna cost
more money now when we're dealing with
space travel when we're dealing with the
cost of
taking things from the surface of planet
earth and lifting them into orbit just
as step one
so this is not just the metal that the
devices are made out of
every pound and every ounce costs an
enormous amount of money in jet fuel
to elevate out of the earth's atmosphere
but all the water people are going to
drink all the food they're going to eat
all right it gets ridiculous it's much
much more difficult than planting a bus
strip
but nevertheless you can understand the
difference between having one bus go
back and forth in bus trip
and 1 000 buses going simultaneously now
if somebody said to you that building a
city
at the bottom of the ocean encased in a
glass
bubble is impossible
you could very easily in this context
say no it's not
that's not impossible at all but we get
into some really interesting and
challenging questions
on this scale of magnitude when we're
thinking about possibility and
impossibility
the political costs and economic
consequences if you build
a city at the bottom of the ocean
encased in a glass bubble
it's probably has absolutely zero
scientific
value if nearly zero economic value has
some tourist value
some people are going to pay to go down
in a submarine or something for the
novelty of it one could say much the
same as
much of the space program frankly um
if you start to estimate the cost of
doing that
they are so much lower than sending just
one team of human beings to mars to live
permanently
on a space station maybe even if just
one person or two people
living on a permanent you know base
on mars that it starts to seem like the
easiest thing in the world now what are
the advantages
of being at the bottom of the ocean well
you have access to hospitals
like if someone gets sick while they're
in this little bubble at the bottom of
the ocean
you can put them on a submarine bring
them to the nearest city or you could
take a doctor from the nearest city
put him on a submarine center the boat
wow what a cost savings they have access
to air oh you might think air is hard to
get
at the bottom of the ocean try getting
air on mars okay try getting air in
earth orbit okay it's quite easy to
bring
air to the bottom of the ocean it's
quite easy to bring food it's quite
quite easy to bring potable water
or to convert you have gravity in fact
the advantages you have
of having a colony so to speak at the
bottom of the ocean over
building a colony on the surface of mars
or the surface are so extreme the number
of trillions of dollars
you would save it's so radical that you
can also make a kind of
moral case for this you can say
morally ethically it's superior
to build a city in a plastic bubble or a
glass bubble everyone think about
translucent bubble
at the bottom of the ocean this is like
a moral cause we should support and we
should stop
fantasizing about or wasting billions
and trillions of dollars
on the possibility of lunar bases
orbital bases you know permanent cities
in orbit and and
building a colony on mars so that's how
much th that's how much the cost that
makes it
there's a civil war in myanmar
right now some people want democracy
and some people don't
how much would it cost to build
an earthly paradise in myanmar
compared to building a city encased in
glass at the bottom of the ocean
an orbital platform with a million
people living on it permanently
a colony on the surface of mars are
permanently inhabited
moon base how much would it cost
to raise the standard of living in
each and every town in myanmar
to be equal to disneyland california
let's really set our sights high and
let's do a cost estimate where the
quality
of public bathrooms and schools
and roads and democracy is
better than anaheim california
it's not perhaps not paradise
perhaps perhaps 20 better than anaheim
would qualify as paradise and let's
let's
throw in some rides every single town
has got to have at least a flume ride
or a ferris wheel we can do cost
estimates how much does it cost to have
uh okay ten thousand ferris wheels for
myanmar
okay that may sound ridiculous that may
sound
like a waste of money you say the
burmese people don't need
ferris wheels they need democracy i say
unto you these things go hand in hand
they need ferris wheels and they need
wave pools
they i can't even think of other
examples
they need roller coasters whatever i i
never go to disneyland and these kind of
places it's not my thing
you know if you say we are going to
attempt
the disneylandification of myanmar and
you come up
with a cost estimate it's going to seem
cheap compared to the space program it's
going to seem
cheap compared to building a base on the
bottom of the ocean and you can already
imagine why
i've sketched out some of these
demographic demographic factors and it
will have tremendous
positive knock-on effects here
on planet earth now nobody is talking
about building
ferris wheels in myanmar nobody is
talking about building
paradise in myanmar no one is talking
about life in myanmar
being potentially better than life in
anaheim california
nobody even thinks it's possible and we
live our lives
personally professionally emotionally
and politically
within a cage of what we perceive
to be possible and what we presume to be
impossible
i can't count how many people
i've spoken to who said to me that
they'd like to learn
sanskrit but it's impossible and i gotta
sit them down and talk them through
exactly how possible it is
all right whether it's sanskrit
or it's pali or it's latin or it's
ancient greek and most time when you
talk to someone face to face
you can find some other activity they're
doing in their life that takes up about
this much
time say oh do you go to the gym when do
you go to the gym every day oh okay
really
so that adds up to 15 hours a week okay
guess what the same amount of time
you're spending at the gym now
you could be learning latin you could be
learning ancient greek you could be
learning sanskrit pali
whatever the language is talking about
and i'm in a position i have enough
experience i can talk them through
exactly what that's
like exactly what is attainable and
what's unattainable and how much
help you need or to what extent you can
just do it with your own mobile phone
you know what i think you can do which
is with applications download the
internet and the
dictionaries you need to get i can i can
really give someone
valuable advice on those steps if they
want to do it but you know what changes
when you realize it's possible
guilt shame responsibility
because now you realize it's been
possible all along
and your concept of what's possible and
impossible has been an excuse
it's an excuse you've been hiding behind
and it's even a mask you've been wearing
that kind of prevents you from seeing
reality around you
in all of its detail you know it's a
mask that kind of cuts off
your view of the full range of options
and possibilities
in your life and you've been wearing it
for all these years
right and now you have to face up to
what's possible
and the only thing lacking in the
equation
is you your effort your will
your resolution your decision your your
willingness to
to make it happen right now most you
know
futurology most talking about like
what's what's attainable in our glorious
unthought of future
has a lot more to do with the
self-indulgent fantasies of elon musk
than it has to do with the study of
latin or sanskrit or pali or
chinese or any other language right it's
tragic the fantasies tell us a great
deal
about human nature and one of the most
central
aspects of human nature is after all
laziness
that's really what we're all we're all
struggling against there
yes wouldn't it be nice if someone else
went ahead and made a
made a colony on mars for us to you know
sit back and enjoy
and nobody's oh yes wouldn't it be
wouldn't it be wonderful if elon musk
gets to live out his dream of
farming corn on the surface of mars and
they're not interested in the fact that
mars has
not only no atmosphere to grow corn no
soil
to grow corn no gravity to grow corn it
also doesn't have
sunlight to grow like the most obvious
thing
would literally it would literally be
easier to grow corn at the bottom of the
ocean
then to grow it on the surface of mars
if you start with it okay okay what what
a great fantasy and then you never stop
and look at your own life
and think i could have i could have
bought a farm
i could get land i could take up farming
as a hobby
or as a career could i could go from
having it as a hobby to it really taking
over
i could have done something productive
and creative and innovative and
oh i could have done something with my
life if i think that's heroic
this vision of you know going out to new
frontiers and farming corn
what does that say about me and what
does that say about my life and what i
presume about what's
you know what's possible for me the one
that comes up
most often in canadian politics
okay okay if we're keeping all the way
real what comes up most often is weight
loss
what comes up most often is exercise and
physical
self-transformation because people are
shallow and people
live with a million different excuses
for why they can't lose weight why they
can't get in shape why they can't change
their diet why they can't change their
habits and you live surrounded by people
who have excuses why they can never read
a book
a book that's you know in their first
language like they speak english first
time
through some book and it's like dude if
you if you write it down
if you write it on a chalkboard so you
wake up in the morning every day it
reminds you to read this book you're
going to get it read
you know there are things people live
with the illusion that they're
impossible and unattainable but the one
that comes up
most often in this political context of
the united states and canada
genocide and the obligation so many of
us feel
to learn an indigenous language rather
than just letting them
go extinct so if you if you're watching
this and you're from england
or something if you're from spain from
some other
country some other continent you may not
know what it's like
to every day drive your car down a
highway and have
cities with unpronounceable place names
in extinct languages
or nearly extinct languages you know or
languages where you've never met anyone
who know you can understand them or know
what it means i've actually been on i
studied ojibwe and cree
so i said all the time i primarily
studied cree my program also contained
the unit on ojibwe
if i just say cree people don't know
what language i'm talking about so i
normally say cree and ojibwe
i studied those languages at first
nations university canada
and several times i went on wikipedia
and other websites and i corrected the
explanation
for the name of a city or town in canada
you know maybe once it was a river
but normally it's a city or town has one
of these names and the the funniest
thing was
you know they had sources so they would
have a wrong explanation
for why the town was named what it was
and they'd have a footnote you know it's
the wikipedia style and i could click
and i'd go and be able to find the book
it was published then
there are people out there treating
these and i i would i would provide a
footnote
and i would actually name the the pages
of the dictionary
like yeah oh yes well allow me to do the
incredibly in-depth research of looking
the word up in the dictionary
but you know in canada almost nobody has
access to a dictionary for cree
or ojibwe i think this is the level of
ignorance okay
people live their whole lives
with the assumption that there is this
process of genocide there are these
languages disappearing
and there is nothing we can do about it
that
nobody can learn the language not even
the people who genetically are
linked to that to that history and the
answer is
no you can learn latin you can learn
greek you can learn hebrew
you know you can do it you know what
it's it's all up to you
this is not impossible it's possible
what the part that's difficult
the is caring the part that's difficult
is having the will
and the self-discipline and the
commitment to do it
and you know looking at the reality of
canada the united states today
what if there aren't even 500 people
let's let's let's people
what if there aren't 500 white people
willing to do the hard work to learn
cree to learn ojibwe
to learn any other indigenous language
you can name
do you think they're going to be 500
chinese people who are going to do it
people at the linguistic research
institute in africa
how about in france or germany right and
i'm saying
white people because i mean people you
know none of us were born speaking latin
come up with an estimate when people are
learning that all right
either this is possible or impossible
all right if it's
actually impossible let's think through
the implications of that and if we can
admit to ourselves that it's possible
let's really deal with the implications
of the fact that nobody is doing it
and nobody is going to do it all right
in this way
the sense of shame the sense of guilt
the sense of responsibility begins
with an awareness that some alternate
course of action
is possible
most americans and most canadians are
resigned
to the idea that our first nations
people
our indigenous people live in third
world conditions
oh yeah they don't really have drinking
water and electricity
and roads the way we do because they
live on these reservations that we kind
of force them on
and this is just seen as normal right
yeah i guess they kind of have a
separate
school system and look i know a lot more
about this in the average person i'm
here
putting on the voice of the average
white canadian or white american
most people have never thought it
through if you ask a white american
oh yeah yeah you know there are those
african-american
colleges and universities the special
black people black power kind of
what do you what do you think the
situation is for the navajo what do you
think the situation is for the inuit
what do you think the situation is for
your own
indigenous people the vast majority of
americans will just be dumbfounded
they'll just say i don't know
they'll just say i know are there
universities for those people do those
people have their own universities the
same way
black people would say in africa they do
have you ever been tempted to enroll
there yourself
how about have do you know anyone do you
know any white people who wanted to
compete
to get into one of those colleges did
your high school counselor encourage you
to apply because they're they're across
america like geographically
they're spread out i mean i can say
something similar for canada
right this is un unthought of is it
possible
is it possible to provide our indigenous
people
with world-class running water
and electricity and internet
connectivity
and primary schools high schools and
universities
why don't you do a cost estimate of what
it would take
to raise the quality of life on canada
and america's indian reservations first
nations territories whatever you want to
say
to raise the quality of life there to be
equivalent
to anaheim california
what would it take to raise the quality
of
their high schools and their
universities
to be comparable to the university of
california berkeley
to be the most prestigious the most
excellent universities in the united
states of america
and canada and you know what
you might have to make some people
uncomfortable you might have to go to
some other
universities and shut down some of their
departments and say no no
we're closing down this department at
this university of big city and we're
going to take your professors
and we're going to go make them live in
the middle of nowhere because we don't
want it to always be the middle of
nowhere
we're actually going to reallocate
resources
including human resources and we are
going to put you out on the frontier to
do something
new and bold and different oh oh oh
sorry that [ __ ] you oh sorry
oh do you find that depressing you find
that challenging would you rather go to
mars
would you feel more pride tilling the
soil
of mars or the surface of the moon oh
i'm sorry
you don't feel any sense of adventure or
do something new yeah you know what
there are first nations people there are
indigenous people out in remote areas of
montana and western ontario
you know and you know what we're not
going to accept the fact that they live
in conditions that are worse than
myanmar
right now we're not getting the fact
that their status in this democracy
is less democratic than the status of
indigenous people in myanmar i defy you
look it up
but totally totally racist colonialist
system of government in canada that was
never meant to
represent or include indigenous people
and it still doesn't because we never
reformed it we never wrote a new
constitution
we never came with new electoral
practices nuclear is ridiculous but
we've a worse than apartheid system of
extinguishment
towards our indigenous people oh yeah
you know what some of the most pampered
comfortable people in all of canada and
all the united states are probably going
to have to pack up
and go to a new frontier which is a lot
more comfortable than living
under a glass bubble at the bottom of
the ocean or in a lunar colony
on the moon on mars and they're gonna
have to learn to take pride in that and
say
we are the generation that decided this
is possible
this is our priority it's necessary it's
happening
now the whole tide of history of these
languages disappearing and our political
leaders saying these people don't matter
and they're going to be forgotten
we're going to turn it around we're
going to go in the other direction even
if it
costs 1 trillion
because if you look at the annual budget
for nasa
if you look at the amount of money being
wasted on nasa
year after year after year and you think
what if that budget
was going into first nations education
indigenous people's education
and even indigenous peoples plumbing and
electricity and some of those things
that i mentioned
what do you think the cumulative effect
of that would be after just 10 years
after just 20 years
it would change everything and it
wouldn't just change things for native
americans it would change
things for white americans and black
americans and hispanic americans and
everybody else
okay and it has to start with a
commitment
all right in the same way that the
absurd idea
of building a city under a glass bottle
at the bottom of the ocean in a glass
bottle it's a good way of putting it at
the bottom of the ocean
and the same way that that ridiculous
idea
starts to seem moral starts to seem like
a moral imperative
when you compare it to the absurdity of
elon musk's
mars colony all right in that same way
when you start to compare what the
government
actively is wasting billions of dollars
on
like the bombardment of afghanistan
and iraq and the space program and all
these things when you start to compare
what the money could be spent on and
what is spent on to this
possibility all right becomes necessary
to make a commitment and say you know
what
building a base on the moon sounds like
fun
sending another rover to explore mars
and map it and everyone
it sounds fun but we have to make a
commitment that we are not
going to do that we have to write it
down in the constitution
or in the highest level of federal law
that you got we are going to make a
commitment
no more money spent on mars
no more money spent on the moon until
our own indigenous people have caught up
until they have schools and roads and
democracy every bit as good
as anaheim california or
better hey hey let's shoot for the moon
let's let's not be satisfied with
mediocrity
let's actually try to build a utopia
not in myanmar we're here right here in
the united states of canada
let's ask ourselves
what would be possible and let's
push up right against those limits of
what we presume
to be impossible